# Prerequisites

- `uv`
- `protoc`
- `make`
- `terraform`

This project uses `uv` as a project manager. To bootstrap this project, follow these steps:

```
make clean
make bootstrap
```

## Docker or Equivalent

- This project has been assembled and tested with `podman >= 5.20` and should work with Docker just as well.
  - `podman`
  - `podman compose`
  - or; `docker`

# Framework

This project uses the FastAPI framework to manage an application with multiple asynchronous components, which include:

- A "reader" task that at some frequency samples the state of a "sensor" and places the packed bytes of this "reading" on
  a queue.
- A "producer" task that at some frequency reads messages from the buffer queue and parses them as a Python object using
  a Pydantic model, then creates a protobuf message from this model and publishes the serialized protobuf bytes to a message
  queue (Kafka).

FastAPI is used to provide a web framework around these tasks, especially for the ability to build a `/health` route that may
understand the state of the production tasks and signal overall application health to an orchestrator. Otherwise, the FastAPI
framework allows one to build additional routes over the top of the production tasks; some additional routes that would be
interesting or useful to implement include

- A `/stats` endpoint that exposes certain statistics as generated by the producer task.
- A websockets endpoint that allows a client to read the application buffer queue in real-time.

# The Sensors

This project implements a few emulated IOT sensors that represent the types of devices an IOT network may have
in the real world. Each sensor is associated with a `payload` that represents the values generated by the device
as it is operating. Sensors may have one or more payload values if they emit readings for multiple physical sensors;
for instance, a `TemperatureHumiditySensor` measures both ambient temperature and relative humidity.

The runtime environment of this project could be imagined to be an SoC to which various hardware sensors are attached, such
as an ESP32 module or Raspberry Pi integrated in a package with generic hardware sensors attached to GPIO.

The common message payload assumed by the emulated sensors in this project is defined in the associated `sensor_payload`
message defined in the protobuf specifcation for the sensor, but it is not assumed that the emulated sensors emit
protobuf messages. Instead, the emulated sensors conform to a very simple wire protocol:

- Payloads are sent in a packed binary format, as implemented by Python's `struct.pack` function.
- Payloads are packed in network byte order (big-endian).
- Payload values are packed in the same order and with the same type as defined in the protobuf message associated with the
  sensor, i.e., one could imagine that the protobuf messages have been constructed according to some published datasheet
  for the supported sensors.

For example, an emulated temperture/humidity sensor is associated with a protobuf message like:

```
message IotTempHumidity {
    sint32 temperature_c = 100;
    int32 rel_hum_pct = 101;
}
```

So the emulated sensor will emit a packed binary message using the format `>iI`: big-endian, signed 4-byte integer, unsigned 4-byte integer.

This means that the sensor payloads emitted by the emulated sensors in this project are parsed twice:

1. From packed binary message to a Python object. This parsing expects to unpack the message into a Python native object, such as a dict, dataclass, or Pydantic model.
2. From Python object to protobuf message. The serialization of a Python object to a protobuf message is performed before the application publishes a payload to a message queue.

# The Message Queue

This project implements a message queue producer in a modular way but only implements a Kafka producer with a protobuf serializer.

The implementation of this message queue producer is based on an environment in which an IOT device may be minted with some client certificate pair
where the authentication and authorization of the client is performed with mutual TLS. This authentication scheme is supported by Kafka and is consistent
with the AWS IoT Core services, which use MQTT instead of Kafka.

## Terraform and PKI

The PKI used by this project is bootstrapped by a terraform module located in the `terraform/` directory. It creates a Root CA and a pair of Intermediate CAs,
one for server certificates and one for clients. Finally, it generates and signs with these CAs a set of certificates that can be used by a Kafka broker and
a Kafka client (producer/consumer/admin).

The artifacts associated with this PKI are created in the `cert/` directory, and include both keystore (private keys) and truststore (public certificate) files.

## Kafka

A Kafka broker may be started from the compose file in the `docker/` directory with `docker compose up kafka` assuming that the PKI bootstrapping has been performed
and the required PEM files are available in `cert/`.

It can be useful to test the operation of the Kafka broker independently of the rest of the project application, and for that the `openssl` CLI tool and the `kcat`
utility are both handy.

- Use `openssl s_client -CAfile cert/cacert.pem -connect localhost:29092` to verify that the Broker is up and listening with a correct TLS certificate.
- Use `kcat -F config/kcat.conf -L` to verify client connectivity to the Kafka broker using mTLS.

Kafka is configured in a secure manner that requires client SSL authentication using trusted certificates. There are three certificate pairs generated in the `cert/` directory,
one for the Kafka broker itself and three for different sorts of clients:

- `broker_ssl_keystore_location.pem`: this keystore contains the Broker's identity and should be used only by the broker. It is granted super-user access in the cluster.
- `admin_ssl_keystore_location.pem`: this keystore will include the private key and certificate chain for the `User:admins` principal which is granted super-user access in the
  cluster. Use this identity when accessing AdminAPI actions with the cluster.
- `producer.[key|pem]`: the key pair associated with a `User:producers` principal. Use this identity when producing records into a Kafka topic.
- `consumer.[key|pem]`: the key pair associated with a `User:consumers` principal. Use this identity when consuming records from a Kafka topic.

Performing Kafka AdminAPI actions is necessary to create topics and apply topic ACLs after the cluster has started. This can be done with the official Kafka client or a gitops tool
like `jikkou`. The `kafka/` directory has instructions and configuration files applicable to the AdminAPI actions necessary.

## Kafka UI

The Docker compose file in `docker/` includes a service specification for a Kafka UI, which will use a certificate associated with the `User:admins` Kafka principal to connect
to a running Kafka broker. This Kafka UI instance is also configured to use a protobuf deserializer so messages in a topic can be viewed directly in the Kafka UI.

# Code Standards

- Use `ruff` to both lint and format the code, including import organization. This tool replaces `flake8`, `black`, and `isort`. Ruff can be invoked with `make lint`
  if the tool has been installed via `uv tool install ruff`.
- Uses the Black standard of 88-character lines with 4-space indentation.
- Docstrings are [numpydoc](https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/format.html) style.

# Methods of Execution

## Docker Image
The project can be built into an OCI image for use with Docker, Podman, Kubernetes, etc. The `docker/Dockerfile` defines the build parameters, summarized here:

* Uses a multi-stage build pattern where a "builder" target assembles the project's dependencies and Python runtime distribution.
  A "runtime" target copies these application artifacts into an otherwise minimal "distroless" image.

* Uses the `uv` tool to both install a runtime Python distribution (based on "standalone" cpython packages) and install the project's dependencies into a virtual environment.

* The runtime build stage copies only the standalone Python distribution and the virtual environment into the runtime image.

* The runtime image's entrypoint is set to the `python3` binary within the virtual environment, which itself is linked to the standalone Python distribution.
  The "command" argument for the runtime image is the name of the Python module to run as the application's entrypoint.

## Directly
The project can be run directly after it has been bootstrapped (`make bootstrap`) and the virtual environment has been activated (`source .venv/bin/activate`).
